<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no" ?><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta content="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
<link href="styles/zstylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<title>Foreword</title>
</head>

<body>
	<h1 class="heading">Foreword</h1>

	<h1 class="subheading">In a nutshell</h1>
	<!--Explain why you created this e-book and how intrigued you were by the reaction from the mainstream media.-->
	<p class="noindent top">So this is my attempt to preserve the catalyst to one of 2017's most intriguing political controversies. <i>Google's Idealogical Echochamber: How bias clouds our thinking about diversity and inclusion</i> was originally an internal memo written with the intention to raise issues with the company's diversity program. The article (which I have done my absolute best to preserve as intact as possible, though I did some formatting alterations) is well researched and has footnotes and hyperlinks to external sources which are academic, encyclopedic and journalistic throughout.</p>
	<p>Shortly after publication the memo's author James Damore received backlash from fellow employees and members of the public due to the apparent leaking of the memo onto the internet at large. There were many articles written about the memo and Damore himself both supportative and critical.</p>
	<p>He was then fired from Google shortly after (date?) and has continued to be critical of the company.</p>

	<h1 class="subheading">Who is James Damore?</h1>

	<p class="noindent top">James Damore is a former senior software engineer on Google's Mountain View campus (or Googleplex) from 2013 to 2017.</p>
	<p>Academically he has a masters in <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Systems_biology">Systems Biology</a> from Harvard University and claims he would have continued his degree to a PhD had he not joined Google's software engineering internship programme.<sup><a id="cit-1" href="#ref-1">i</a></sup> He also has a Bachelor of Science in <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Molecular_biology">Molecular Biology</a> from the University of Illinois.<sup><a id="cit-2" href="#ref-2">ii</a></sup></p>
	<p>Politically, according to this memo he is a classical liberal with therefore libertarian thinking.</p>

	<h1 class="subheading">Support</h1>

	<h1 class="subheading">Critique</h1>

	<!--<p class="noindent top">Hal Motley</p>-->
	<hr/>
	<p class="ref" id="ref-1"><a href="#cit-1">i.</a> This was stated by Damore in his interview with Milo Yiannopoulos <i><a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H2J5E8sSdsI">MILO Meets James Damore, Author of the Google Memo</a></i> at (timestamp).</p>
	<p class="ref" id="ref-2"><a href="#cit-2">ii.</a> James Damore's qualifications and employment history can be viewed on his <a href="https://www.linkedin.com/in/james-damore-b277b62b/">LinkedIn profile</a>.</p>

</body>
</html>
