<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no" ?><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta content="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
<link href="styles/zstylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<title>Foreword</title>
</head>

<body>
	<h1 class="heading">Foreword</h1>

	<h1 class="subheading">In a nutshell</h1>
	<!--Explain why you created this e-book and how intrigued you were by the reaction from the mainstream media.-->
	<p class="noindent top">So this is my attempt to preserve the catalyst to one of 2017's most intriguing political controversies. <i>Google's Idealogical Echo Chamber: How bias clouds our thinking about diversity and inclusion</i> was originally an internal memo written with the intention to raise issues with the company's diversity program. The article (which I have done my absolute best to preserve as intact as possible, though I did some formatting alterations) is well researched and has footnotes and hyperlinks to external sources which are academic, encyclopedic and journalistic throughout.</p>
	<p>Shortly after publication the memo's author James Damore received backlash from fellow employees and members of the public due to the apparent leaking of the memo onto the internet at large. There were many articles written about the memo and Damore himself both supportative and critical.</p>
	<p>He was then fired from Google shortly on the 7<sup>th</sup> August 2017 and has continued to be critical of the company.</p>

	<h1 class="subheading">Who is James Damore?</h1>

	<p class="noindent top">James Damore is a former senior software engineer on Google's Mountain View campus (or Googleplex) from 2013 to 2017.</p>
	<p>Academically he has a masters in <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Systems_biology">Systems Biology</a> from Harvard University and claims he would have continued his degree to a PhD had he not joined Google's software engineering internship programme.<sup><a id="cit-1" href="#ref-1">i</a></sup> He also has a Bachelor of Science in <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Molecular_biology">Molecular Biology</a> from the University of Illinois.<sup><a id="cit-2" href="#ref-2">ii</a></sup></p>
	<p>Politically, according to this memo he is a classical liberal with therefore libertarian thinking.</p>

	<h1 class="subheading">Support</h1>

	<h1 class="subheading">Critique</h1>

	<h1 class="subheading">Where is James Damore now?</h1>

	<p class="noindent top">As of January 2018, James Damore is currently suing Google alongside another former employeee David Gudeman for $ via the Supreme Court of California claiming the corporation is hostile towards white male conservatives.<sup><a id="cit-3" href="#ref-3">iii</a></sup></p>
	<p>I am not versed in law so I cannot comment or speculate on the lawsuit's legal merits and chances of success or failure. However Damore's memo is included as part of the 161-page lawsuit as "EXHIBIT A" and the lawsuit also makes interesting allegations.</p>
	<p>Using my knowledge I have worked my way through several sections of the lawsuit and provided commentary, all the <i>italicised</i> paragraphs have been left unaltered (alterations are left unitalicised).</p>
	<p>At the time of writing, Google's only response to this lawsuit was during an interview at a performance hosted by MSNBC and Dehosted, Google's CEO Sundar Pichai stated that he didn't regret firing James Damore with the following <i>“I regret that people misunderstand that we may have made this [decision] for a political position one way or another...”</i>, assumingly keeping to the narrative that Damore was dismissed for violating corporation's code of conduct.<sup><a id="cit-4" href="#ref-4">iv</a></sup></p>

	<!--<p class="noindent top">Hal Motley</p>-->
	<hr/>
	<p class="ref" id="ref-1"><a href="#cit-1">i.</a> This was stated by Damore in his interview with Milo Yiannopoulos <i><a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H2J5E8sSdsI">MILO Meets James Damore, Author of the Google Memo</a></i> at (timestamp).</p>
	<p class="ref" id="ref-2"><a href="#cit-2">ii.</a> James Damore's qualifications and employment history can be viewed on his <a href="https://www.linkedin.com/in/james-damore-b277b62b/">LinkedIn profile</a>.</p>
	<p class="ref" id="ref-3"><a href="#cit-3">iii.</a> <a href="https://regmedia.co.uk/2018/01/09/damore.pdf">James Damore and David Gudeman VS Google LLC</a> (Case No. 18CV321529) hosted by The Register. I have downloaded that copy and provided it in this book's GitHub repository so that it is archived.</p>
	<p class="ref" id="ref-4"><a href="#cit-4">iv.</a> <i><a href="http://uk.businessinsider.com/google-ceo-sundar-pichai-memo-writer-james-damore-wasnt-fired-for-politics-2018-1?r=US&amp;IR=T/">Google CEO: We didn't fire the diversity memo writer for political reasons</a></i> by BusinessInsider and <i><a href="http://fortune.com/2018/01/20/google-ceo-has-no-regrets-about-firing-author-of-anti-diversity-memo/">Google CEO Has No Regrets About Firing Author of Anti-Diversity Memo</a></i> by Fortune.</p>

</body>
</html>
